
--------------------------------------------------------------

'clarity' and 'anchor' statements:


each function/method in a program is seen as having a 'contract.' SQL statements should be no different. each should have a contract.

once you have contracts, the question is how to 'enforce' them. tests or verification? (dijkstra says tests never show absense of bugs, only presence) in imperative lang, test is easy, verification is hard. so tests 'win'. but in sql, what if verification is easier than testing?


obviously the SQL query itself imposes constraints on the outcome. also, the table schema imposes constraints on the outcome.  but poq is targeting the additional "imagined or intended" constraints (app-domain relevant, semantic contstraints) that the sql author had in mind, and verifying those.

a specification should be implementation agnostic. modular. and therefore let us swap implementations. this is the same goal (in many cases) as test coverage.

if part of the db is modified, what other parts are affected and "by how much" or "how severely" (or 'does the effect matter?'). this means the possibility of prevention of errors, but also potentially saving time examining every query with a given table-name, when some won't mind the change.


------------------------------------------------------------

TODO:  make clear: The purpose of the tool is to prove that certain properties of the SQL statement and its result set will hold true for all states that this database can attain, including past states, present states, and future states.

The query semantics become part of the "theory" that is active in the prover.

Custom axioms represent the rules for evaluating SQL queries.


--------------------------------------------------------------


----------

The pitfalls described in chapter 2 were all demonstrated using (on average) only about two base tables.  Admittedly, when only two tables participate in a query, manual inspection can indeed be an effective and efficient method for error-checking.  In this chapter, as well, examples are presented using as few tables and as few columns as possible.

relational queries can be much larger (in practice)
tables can be of much greater arity (in practice)
DDL is not always kept close at hand while coding (in practice)
SQL operators often imply an on-the-fly generation of numerous 'virtual tables' while generating the final resultset.

----------



testing versus proving.

the paper about how unit tests (on duck-typed code) do a lot of what a compiler does in strong-typed code.


sql has no higher-order logic, no higher-order functions.

also, you don't need a 'termination proof'.


financial industry use of SQL. correctness seems like a big deal there.


at least three ways that errors could happen. (four? five? add more if you have em') 1. unexpected parameter to the query. 2. unexpected table states, 3. table schema definitions CHANGE!!

... note: #3 is a big one!  even if we all think we write code that we are convinced is correct 'in the now', how to we 'protect' it going forward?

relational programming/thinking as one of many programming paradigms, like OO, functional, logical.

even though relational SQL is not turing complete, that does not rule out that SQL can express a wide swath of the calculations carried out by many programs.  many programs are based principally on receiving input and then transforming the input into some other format. settings configured in a gui are transformed into sound waves in a sound file. user input is transformed into an html file suitable for publishing to the web.  these and many similar scenarios do not require turing completeness.

No.  There are cases where we cannot prove termination -- an
interpreter for a Turing-complete programming languages is one of
them.  This fact is what started the current thread in the first
place.

This being said, however, I claim that most programs are not of this
nature.  In fact, I can't think of any other example.  Most "useful"
programs are written by their respective programmers with an
(informal) termination proof in mind (*).  The existence of the
termination proof implies that the program could have been written in
a language where all programs terminate.

 Perpetually running programs such as OS kernels


testing vs verification for C code:  both involve running a process. possibly having one process launch and monitor another.

testing vs verification for SQL: with verification, one process can statically verify SQL code (query code and DDL code). with testing, a database must be populated. a connection established.

regression testing in the face of schema changes?
